ISLAMABAD (Reuters) - Pakistani security forces have killed 20 militants near the Afghan border, a security official said on Thursday, as tensions surfaced with the United States over how to tackle the Taliban and al Qaeda.

An intensifying insurgency in Afghanistan has piled pressure on Pakistan to go after militants operating from sanctuaries in remote enclaves on its side of the border. It has also led to a sharp increase in U.S. strikes on militants in Pakistan.

The new government in Islamabad says it is committed to the campaign against militancy, launched after the September 11 attacks seven years ago, but bans incursions by U.S. troops.

In the latest fighting in the northwestern Bajaur region, Pakistani security forces backed by air strikes killed 20 militants in an attack on a militant stronghold in the village of Rashkai that began on Wednesday and went on through Thursday.

"Troops are advancing and there have been encounters. Troops are also engaging them with artillery," said military spokesman Major Murad Khan.

Another military official said four soldiers had been killed, and some Arabs were among the dead militants. Troops have killed more than 600 militants in Bajaur since August, the government says.

Militants in Bajaur, where some analysts believe top al Qaeda leaders have been hiding, regularly cross into Afghanistan to attack Western troops and government forces there.

Violence in Afghanistan has soared over the past two years as al Qaeda and Taliban fighters have regrouped. The U.S. military said on Wednesday it was not winning there and would revise its strategy to combat militant havens in Pakistan.

The New York Times reported that President George W. Bush had secretly approved orders in July that for the first time allowed U.S. special forces to carry out ground assaults inside Pakistan without the approval of the Pakistani government.

Pakistani stocks, down 34 percent this year, ended lower on Thursday on concern over what one analyst called an "unwelcome spike of geo-political noise" over the conduct of the U.S.-led war on terrorism.

ANGER

Army chief General Ashfaq Kayani said in a strongly worded statement on Wednesday that Pakistan would not allow foreign troops onto its soil.

Pakistan's sovereignty and territorial integrity would be defended at all cost, he said, dismissing speculation of a secret deal allowing U.S. forces to cross the border.

Helicopter-borne U.S. commandos carried out a ground assault last week in Pakistan's South Waziristan, a militant border sanctuary, the first known incursion into Pakistan by U.S. troops since the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan, killing 20 people.

Pakistan condemned the raid. Kayani said there were no quick fixes to a highly complex militant problem and reconciliation efforts were also needed.

Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani said Kayani's statement reflected government views.

Some Pakistani analysts say a frustrated U.S. administration wants to score points before a November election but it risks sparking an uprising among ethnic Pashtuns on the border.

"We will convince the U.S. that it can get nothing through unilateral action in tribal areas except opposition of the masses," Pakistan's ambassador to the United States, Hussain Haqqani, was reported telling the BBC.

The U.S. attack also complicates the situation for Pakistan's new civilian president, Asif Ali Zardari, who was sworn in on Tuesday, having forced former army chief Pervez Musharraf to stand down last month after nine years in power.

Support for the U.S.-led campaign against militancy is deeply unpopular in Pakistan, where many people say it has incited violence. Like Musharraf, Zardari is seen as close to the United States but, as an elected civilian leader, he will face pressure to pay heed to public opinion.

At the same time, Pakistan is highly vulnerable to any reduction in U.S. financial support, given the depletion of foreign reserves, which has sparked talk <conditional type='ii'>it <result>could default</result> on a sovereign bond next year <trigger>unless </trigger>it <condition>gets</condition> foreign financing.</conditional>

Pakistan's state news agency reported last week that the United States had reimbursed Pakistan $365 million for operations and logistical support in the war against terrorism.

Pakistani ties with Afghanistan have also been strained by its complaints that militants operate from Pakistani sanctuaries and its calls for the havens to be eliminated.

Afghan President Hamid Karzai told a news conference in Kabul the United States had to change strategy and he reiterated his call for the sanctuaries to be destroyed.

Pakistan plays down the significance of sanctuaries, saying the Afghan war is an Afghan problem.

(Additional reporting by Kamran Haider; Writing by Robert Birsel; Editing by Roger Crabb)

<conditional type='ii'>it <result>could default</result> on a sovereign bond next year <trigger>unless </trigger>it <condition>gets</condition> foreign financing.</conditional>